---
date: '2017-09-30T01:49:50.776Z'
layout: default
"": ""
---
To optimize your downtime, you also need to take specific steps to heal your body and get yourself ready for the next big push. Here are some guidelines for maximizing your recovery and athletic performance: Night Night In general, you should try to get at least 7.5 hours of sleep a night, although younger athletes may need up to 9 hours. We can’t express how important a good night’s sleep is to a recovering athlete. This is when your body heals, repairs and detoxes. Tips: Use a Fitbit Charge 2 to monitor your sleep. It can help you quickly identify what helps and hampers your sleep, so that you can remedy any problems. Supplements such as ZM Plus help promote deep REM sleep to ensure that you get enough high quality rest to recover, function and thrive the next day. Your Diet More important than what you eat immediately after your training session is the quality of food you eat throughout the day. Avoid all processed sugars, limit caffeine (and other stimulants) and control insulin levels by eating fats and protein with every meal. Tips: Buy a high-quality Blendtec blender and fall in love with smoothies! Many athletes “supercharge” them with our Super Berries or Supergreens powders. Help your body convert fat into usable energy by adding coconut MCT powder to your morning coffee. Blend and enjoy the benefits of ketosis. Dehydration Dehydration can damage muscles and significantly reduce the body’s ability to repair itself. Make sure you get plenty of water throughout the day. To ensure you always have water available, we recommend ordering two or three of these Nalgene water bottles. Tips: Make sure you’re getting enough high-quality Himalayan sea salt throughout the day to improve your electrolyte balance. Help detoxify your system by squeezing some lemon juice into your water first thing in the morning – before breakfast, coffee or even your shower. Endurance athletes can see an immediate boost in recovery and performance by drinking nitrate-rich beet juice 30 minutes prior to a workout. Protein Athletes need the amino acids found in protein. It’s vital to build, repair and heal muscles after a strenuous workout. The best sources of protein are high-quality grass-fed or wild-caught meats. Tips: Take a Glutamine supplement. Glutamine is a natural amino acid found in meats, eggs and kale that speeds up recovery and reduces muscle soreness. Because it’s hard to get enough from diet alone, a supplement can make a big difference. Try our BCAA powder – it’s super-high-quality, vegan-friendly and unflavored. Take it before your workout to recover faster and build stronger, denser muscles. Stretching As an athlete, you need maximum flexibility in order to get the most out of your workouts and recovery. Stretching is also the best way to prevent injury. Tip: Stretch at least 10 minutes after every workout, using “long-hold” stretches (these straps help). Before the workout, do more active stretches in which you hold positions for just a moment. Smash-N-Mash Much of the soreness that accompanies exercise results from the muscles and fascia – the connective tissue that runs through the body – becoming knotted. Foam rolling, or self-myofascial release, is an essential part of recovery, regardless of your athletic level. Tip: This is an inexpensive foam roller that every household should own. Also, lacrosse balls are perfect for getting deep into thick muscles. HRV Score HRV (heart rate variability) is a non-invasive and simple way to check in with your body to see what level of stress you can endure. By taking a daily HRV reading, you can better understand how hard you should push yourself on any given day. Tip: We recommend the free “Elite HRV” app and this Bluetooth heart-rate monitor, which is sensitive enough to measure your HRV. Active Recovery Rest days provide a necessary break from the strenuous exertions of training. While you shouldn’t push yourself on your off days, some light exercise like taking a walk or an easy bike ride will promote blood flow and help speed up the recovery process. Tip: Get an audiobook account at audible.com to help pass the time and nourish your brain during “active recovery” days. Relax Your Mind Chronic stress can aggravate inflammation, negatively affect your sleep, and impede your body’s ability to recover. To help you bounce back faster and become more resilient, meditation is a great practice. Mindfulness meditation is the go-to form of meditation for athletes. Tip: Find a mindfulness meditation coach near you, or download the free iPhone “Headspace” app. Take a Deep Breath The “4-7-8” technique is a simple breathing exercise that relaxes your body and calms your autonomic nervous system. Simply breathe in for 4 seconds, hold for 7 seconds, and breathe out for 8 seconds. Do this for as little at 2 minutes and you will feel like a different person. Tip: Even if you’re an experienced athlete, practicing the “4-7-8” exercise will boost your performance and enable you to go beyond what you thought possible.